# group_project1

###Project Proposal

Our project aims to discover correlations between the global happiness ranking of individual countries and if relationships between their happiness ranking of their region can be found. We'll investigate the changes of these rankings over each of the last five years based on their score subsets (economy, family, health, freedom and trust in government). Finally, we'll look at the influence of a country's ecological footprint and examine whether that provides any patterns regarding their happiness ranking and any other related questions that the datasets suggest.

Group Task Assignments:

Data Sourcing/Research - Elaine and Christina Data Cleaning - John and Fred Preliminary Analysis - Everyone Visualizations - Elaine Final Analysis/Write-up - Christina Github Merge Manager - John Organize Presentation - Fred and John Presentation - Everyone


## Analysis

### Introduction
In 2012, a team of data analysts pondered the question: which countries are the happiest? They then developed the World Happiness Report. This report investigated how various factors of happiness compared globally. The World Happiness Report provided self-reported happiness scores from their citizens via the Gallup World Poll.  Data regarding a country’s GDP per capita, their social support, life expectancy, freedom and generosity were assigned an indexed value based on real world data.  Data from each year from 2015 through 2019 was provided for close to 160 countries. 

Along with happiness, we wondered how else countries compare and if it shows any relationship to the happiness rankings determined in the World Happiness Report. To complement the nature of the global dataset, we found a global comparison of ecological data for one year titled, The 2016 Global Ecological Footprint. The main areas of focus from this dataset focused on population, GDP (gross domestic product) per capita, HDI (Human Development Index), ecological footprints (broken down by land type then totaled), biocapacity (broken down by land type then totaled), biocapacity deficit or reserve (which refers to if a country uses more or less than their biocapacity, respectively), and overshoot (the amount of time it takes for Earth to regenerate the resources that were depleted the previous year).

Some questions that arose after these datasets are as follows: Do “happier” countries make more money? Is there a relationship between happiness factors  (i.e., social support, life expectancy, freedom, and generosity) and happiness rank ? Are “happier” countries more eco-friendly? With the information presented to us we hypothesized that countries with a higher happiness rank are more likely to show higher scores in various factors of happiness (GDP per capita, social support, life expectancy, freedom, and generosity), meanwhile creating a larger ecological footprint. 

### Methods / Data Cleanup and Exploration
The World Happiness Report and the 2016 Global Ecological Footprint  were data sources found on kaggle.com. 

The World Happiness Report consisted of 5 csv files for years 2015-2019. Some columns were renamed in the process of cleaning the data (i.e., “Happiness.Rank” to “Happiness Rank,” “Happiness.Score” to “Happiness Score,” “Economy..GDP.Per.Capita” to “Economy (GDP Per Capita),” “Family” to “Social Support,” “Health..Life.Expectancy” to “Health (Life Expectancy),” “Trust..Government.Corruption” to “Trust (Government Corruption)”) so that these data frames would consist of the same headers as they communicated the same data. Furthermore, these files were imported and defined as dataframes. All five of the data frames were then merged to create one data frame. And the following relationships were further examined in scatter plots: Country GDP per Capita by Happiness Rank 2015-2019, Country Social Support by Happiness Rank 2015-2019, Country Life Expectancy by Happiness Rank 2015-2019, and Country Freedom by Happiness Rank 2015-2019. To further investigate the Happiness Ranking and GDP data, the .head and .tail functions were utilized to create data frames whose data points were laid over the overall data. Since there appeared to be no correlation between Country Generosity and Happiness Rank, a bar chart was created to examine differences in average generosity across different regions.
The 2016 Global Ecological Footprint provided a dataset for 2016 that allowed us to combine it’s more in-depth global footprint data with the Happiness Report to further examine if there were correlations with a country’s ecological standing. Since the World Happiness Report consisted of 5 csv files for 5 separate years of data, we appropriately selected the file that held data for 2016. These files were then imported and defined as data frames. Before merging, countries from the 2016 Global Ecological Footprint were renamed to match that of the World Happiness Report. The data frames for happiness and ecological data were then merged on the column that defined country names. There were some other areas of overlap that needed to be addressed, such as regions, and how GDP was reported. Since the GDP data from the ecological data held a dollar sign ($) in each of the cells, it was more difficult to extract the values held in this column - therefore, we opted to use the GDP values from the World Happiness Report. The region names associated with each country were also utilized from the World Happiness Report to maintain consistent with the rest of the data. The relationships investigated were Total Ecological Footprint vs. Happiness Rank 2016, and Biocapacity Deficit or Reserve by Happiness Rank 2016. Since there were some considerable outliers, it was decided to narrow the scope of our data to where the majority of data laid. A quartile test was ran to determine which data points were considered outliers, then formatted the scatterplot accordingly.

In each of our scatterplots ,  Happiness Ranking was reported on the x-axis. The x-axis was inverted to represent the increase in rank (160 being the lowest, and 1 being the highest). Scatterplots were also kept consistent by using code, representative of a heat map, to demonstrate density in our data. In addition to the scatterplots, correlation tests were ran to accompany the visuals. As our team is from the United States, we chose to investigate where our country fell as well by using the .groupby function to create a data frame. This data was then layered on top of the overall data in each of  the scatter plots to demonstrate how the United States compared (data points were distinguished by using different markers).

### Data Analysis
Before proceeding, note that negative values were reported due to the inversion of our x-values. 

World Happiness Report: The Country GDP per Capita by Happiness Rank 2015-2019 scatterplot reported an r-squared value of -0.795, suggesting a strong correlation. Country Social Support by Happiness Rank 2015-2019 reported an r-squared value of -0.644, suggesting a moderate correlation. Country Life Expectancy by Happiness Rank 2015-2019 reported an r-squared value of -0.743, suggesting a moderate-strong correlation. Country Freedom by Happiness Rank 2015-2019 reported an r-squared value of -0.538, suggesting a moderate correlation. Country Generosity by Happiness Rank 2015-2019 reported an r-squared value of -0.118, suggesting no correlation. Finally, the ranking for Region Average Generosity are as follows: Australia and New Zealand, Southeastern Asia, North America, Southern Asia, Western Europe, Sub-Saharan Africa, Eastern Asia, Latin America and Caribbean, Middle East and Northern Africa, Central and Eastern Europe.

World Happiness Report and 2016 Global Ecological Footprint: The Total Ecological Footprint vs. Happiness Rank 2016 scatterplot reported a moderate positive correlation with an r-squared value of -0.675. While the Biocapacity Deficit or Reserve by Happiness Rank 2016 reported no correlation with an r-squared value of 0.015. 

### Discussion
According to our data, countries with a higher happiness ranking  show a strong positive correlation to having a higher GDP per capita - demonstrating that happier countries are likely to have a greater household income . The data suggests a moderate, positive correlation between happiness factors (i.e., social support, life expectancy, freedom, and generosity) and happiness rank - demonstrating that happier countries also seem to be exceeding in the previously mentioned factors. The United States seemed to consistently rank within the top 15 countries and followed the trends mentioned for this data set. 

There is a moderate, positive correlation between happiness rank and total ecological footprint - suggesting that happier countries are likely to leave a larger ecological footprint. This may be related to economic factors, which was not investigated in this data exploration. We were surprised to find that there was not a strong correlation between happiness rank and biocapacity deficit/reserve, since many of the countries with a higher HDI reported to be in a greater deficit. Once again, the United States seemed to follow the trends presented for this dataset. However, the United States was nearly an outlier with its reported -4.46 biocapacity deficit.

In summary, our findings align closely to our hypothesis - suggesting that happier countries make more money, report higher scores in various factors of happiness, and seem to have a larger ecological footprint. 

### Post Mortem
Some difficulties encountered in this exploration were as follows: The data cleanup process took longer than expected, focusing our scope on specific questions based on the data we had, and finding the methods and definitions for the data presented in each of the datasets.
If there was more time for exploration, we would have considered some additional questions, such as the following. Are there correlations between the different factors we analyzed? Are the country rankings similar between the different factors? Are there different correlations when looking at the outliers? How do the factors change for countries over time?

